 DRAFT: THE SYMPATHETIC INNERVATION OF THE HEART
================================================

Title: The Sympathetic Innervation of the Heart -- a Clinical Review

Authors: Anish Shah, MD; Amit Shah, MD, MSCR; Puja Mehta, MD; Marc
Thames, MD

Affiliations: Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia

 
=

 INTRODUCTION
=============

The human sympathetic nervous system, the master and commander of the
"fight or flight" response, has not adapted adequately to human disease.
It is the culprit in multiple pathological states, particularly that of
the heart. The sympathetic innervation of the heart is part of the
connection between the brain and the heart and it is inherent to
physiology and pathophysiology of cardiac autonomic function. The
purpose of this review article is to teach clinicians the importance of
the sympathetic nervous system in both normal and pathophysiological
states, share how pathology stems from inappropriate responses by the
autonomic nervous system, and to explore the anatomy and physiology of
sympathetic outflow to the heart. The reader should be able to (1)
understand the relevant anatomy of the sympathetic nervous system as it
innervates the heart, (2) understand the effects of sympathetic tone on
the heart, such as chronotropy, inotropy, lusitropy, and dromotropy, and
(3) understand how sympathetic dysfunction plays a role in pathological
states such as ventricular dysrhythmias, myocardial infarctions, and
cardiomyopathies.

ANATOMIC AND PHYSIOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
=======================================

The neural control of the heart is in part a product of its anatomy. The
structure, sometimes described as the neurocardiac axis, has three
distinct levels: the brain and spinal cord, the thoracic and
extracardiac ganglia (EC), and the intrinsic cardiac nervous system
(IC).^1^ These levels send information through afferent and efferent
limbs of both the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems, and
at each level interactions occur that affect the autonomic state.

\[figure: innervation of the heart anatomy\]

The spinal cord houses the preganglionic neurons of the SNS within the
lateral horns at each vertebral level. Cardiac outflow occurs between
the T1 and T6 vertebrae. The neurons exit through the ventral roots that
merge into the white rami, which join the sympathetic chain and the
ganglia of the EC. In contrast, the vagal preganglionic neurons are in
the brain stem, mainly the medullary dorsolateral reticular formation.
The thoracic spinal segments have a distinct cardiac rhythm and other
frequencies of oscillation that are transmitted to the postganglionic
neurons in the heart. The distinct periodicities include 10 Hz, 2-6 Hz,
respiratory rates, and slower firing that matches the speed of arterial
blood pressure oscillations (Mayer waves).^2^

Although there is some automaticity of the firing rate of the SNS
neurons within the spinal cord, there are many higher orders of
influence that affect the activity of the preganglionic cell bodies. For
example, nervous activity such as a panic attack, can lead to increased
autonomic outflow, but so can events liked traumatic brain injury that
leads to hyperactivation and sympathetic storm. Other peripheral and
systemic reflexes are also integrated at the level of the spinal cord,
such as vasovagal syncope, the mesenteric ganglia response to stress
(lumbosacral outflow).

The thoracic ganglia that make up the EC contain neurons that directly
innervate the myocardium. Both afferent and efferent pathways are
present. The most well-studied is of course the stellate ganglia, which
carries both preganglionic fibers and postganglionic neurons to the
heart. The right stellate ganglia (RSG) and the left stellate ganglia
(LSG) are seen to have differences in function based on the location of
their nerve endings. Of the ventricles, the RSG is directed towards the
anterior and basal aspects, while the LSG is directed towards the
posterior and apical aspects. Both ganglia however dually innervate the
anterior left ventricular (LV) wall.^3^ The RSG in particular in
addition has predominance in the atria, compared to the LSG. The
postganglionic fibers from the thoracic ganglia, as well as the
preganglionic fibers from the spinal cord, terminate within a complex
neural network of ganglionated plexuses (GPs) within the heart that
compose the IC.

The postganglionic neurons of the IC are found in the GPs, which are the
location for the interaction between preganglionic fibers,
parasympathetic fibers, and cardiac interneurons. The majority of GPs
contain 200-1000 neurons each, and form synapses with sympathetic and
parasympathetic fibers that enter the pericardial space.^4^ The highest
density of GPs are near the hilum of the heart, with up to 50% of
cardiac ganglia on the dorsal surface of the LA.^5^ Sympathetic nerves
also travel along the major coronary arteries as a plexus, and decrease
in proportion to vessel size to 2 single fibers at level of
arterioles.^6^

The GPs extend epicardially to innervate the atria, interatrial septum,
and ventricles, but sympathetic innervation is not uniform. Early
studies looked at tyrosine hydroxylase, the enzyme that produces nor
epinephrine (NE), to help identify important sympathetic nerves and
fibers. The ventricles showed a gradient from base to apex, with the
lowest concentration in the apex of the heart.^7^ Another way that the
innervation has been studied is by using radiolabeled
metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG), a catecholamine analog. Studies showed
that the inferior wall of the LV had less uptake than the anterior
region. ^8,9^ In contrast, the inferior LV wall has a higher proportion
of vagal afferent neurons.^10^

The layers of the heart also showed differences in sympathetic density.
The highest is in the epicardium, and it decreases reaching towards the
endocardium. Within the endocardium, there is a right-to-left decreasing
gradient of sympathetic innervation, proportional to the density of
cholinergic (vagal nerves).^11^ Within the epicardium, there is also
ventricle-to-atrium decreasing gradient of innervation. Within the
ventricles, sympathetic afferent neurons are the main sensory neurons.
They are triggered by predominately chemical stimuli, but also by
mechanical stimuli.^12^

 VENTRICULAR FIBRILLATORY THRESHOLD
===================================

Over 100 years ago, John MacWilliam proposed that VF was the mechanism
behind SCD, and subsequently Thomas Jonnesco demonstrated that cardiac
sympathectomy was protective against ventricular arrhythmias.^13,14^
Other corroborative studies by Bernard Lown showed that vagus nerve
stimulation decreased the vulnerability of the heart to VF while
vagotomy increased it.^15,16^ This adequately argues that sympathetic
tone is in part culpable for VF/VT events.

\[figure of VF threshold and vagotomy\]

The unopposed sympathetic nerve is pathologic. Stimulation of the SNS
however can occur from higher nervous factors. An excellent example is
how the frequency of premature ventricular contractions increased under
psychological stress, suggesting that even transient nervous factors
lead to electrical instability.^17^ These extrasystole beats can be
reduced by the introduction of beta-adrenergic blockade.^18^ Empiric and
anecdotal evidence provided the initial insight into how sudden death
was triggered by psychological stress. Engel described several
categories of traumatic life settings that precipitated sudden death,
from the loss of a loved one, acute grief, personal danger, and even
triumph. This pattern was found to play out in a larger scale, with case
series by Greene and Rahe that demonstrated hundreds of episodes of
sudden death preceded acute and chronic emotional events.^19,20^

\[figure: PVC frequency increased with stress\]

The evolutionary purpose of sympathetic outflow to the heart allows for
a by-product, the decrease in the VF threshold that is seen with
stellate stimulation . Its physiologic role however is related to the
original "fight or flight" response. Studies focused on the stellate
ganglia helped to delineate the specific actions the SNS had upon the
heart. The basic responses of the heart are inotropy (increased
"squeeze"), lusitropy (improved relaxation), chronotropy (increased
sinoatrial firing), and dromotropy (improved nerve conduction). There is
an element of handed-ness to the innervation, such that the right and
left stellate ganglia have differing effects, in part because of
location of innervation. The RSG has an higher amount of atrial
innervation, including the SA node, and leads to changes in chronotropy.
The LSG innervates the ventricles predominantly, leading to an increase
in inotropy. The relationship is complex, as right stellectomy can lead
to compensatory contralateral activation.^15^ Bilateral stellectomy
though has a well-established effect of increased the resilience of the
heart to VT and VF.^21^

 CORONARY PERFUSION
===================

In an out-of-hospital cardiac arrests, ST-segment elevations after VT or
VF event have over a 70% chance of significant coronary artery disease
(CAD).^22^ Even after an MI, Dr. Bernard Lown noted that patients were
at significant risk for SCD and would benefit from a coronary care unit
that focused on prophylaxis of arrhythmias. How do acute infarction and
chronic ischemia generate malignant rhythms? There are acute responses
and delayed reorganization of the SNS that explain these findings.

Knowledge of coronary blood flow regulation is important in
understanding the pathogenesis of VT and VF. The most prominent
regulators of the coronary arteries is based on pressure changes. High
pressure leads to sympathetic inhibition, while low pressures causes
increased sympathetic efferent outflow which leads to
vasoconstriction.^23,24^ The coronary arteries are innervated by both
adrenergic and cholinergic neurons, with an increase in the amount of
nerve terminals in the smaller arteries and arterioles.^25^ The beta-1
adrenergic receptors (B1AR) predominate the larger conduit arteries
while the smaller vessels have a higher proportion of B2AR and alpha-1
adrenergic receptors (A1AR).^26,27^ For example, in cardiac transplant
patients, as they have no connection between the EC and IC, systemic NE
leads to coronary vasodilation in the large vessels (e.g. left anterior
descending) in proportion to the concentration of sympathetic nerve
terminals.^28^ However, in the event of ischemia or increased workflow,
coronary vasoconstriction can be attenuated by the metabolic waste
productions like adenosine.^29^ These differences in proportions of
receptors are responsible for balancing perfusion through local
vasodilation and vasoconstriction in the healthy heart, as a response to
cardiac demand and myocardial contraction. These systems were not built
to respond to ischemia.

\[figure: coronary perfusion and VF threshold\]

The heart responds to acute changes in coronary perfusion with an
intense sympathetic response, which subsequently lowers the VF
threshold. Transmural infarcts lead to sympathetic denervation, while
subendocardial ischemia will likely only impact the vagal afferent nerve
endings.^30,31^ This was studied by looking at the response of nerves to
epicardial stimuli. Non-transmural ischemia still allowed for a response
to chemical stimuli, but transmural ischemia lead to apical loss of
efferent sympathetic nerves within 20 minutes. ^32^ After 90 minutes,
afferent sympathetic and vagal nerves also became denervated.^33^ During
these ischemic events, there is an increase in sympathetic excitatory
outflow.^34^.

\[figure: zipes myocardial innervation\]

However there remains a prolonged risk for arrhythmias after
reperfusion. There is differential, heterogenous innervation of
sympathetic fibers in the cardiac tissue that become a nidus for
arrhythmogenesis. Initially after ischemia, IC neuronal remodeling
occurs. There is an immediate and persistent increase in nitric oxide
synthase (NOS) containing neurons and a hypersensitivity to NE stimuli
leading to generalized excitability.^35^ The non-ischemic and ischemic
territories develop differential sympathetic efferent activity after
events as well.^36^ Both denervation and hyperinnervation are the
response, and at the boundary of preserved and ischemic myocardium there
becomes an interdigitation of innervated and denervated tissue.^37^ The
nerve-sprouting that occurs is due to an increase in activity of left
stellate ganglia in the setting of chronic myocardial ischemia.^38,39^

Not only does myocardial ischemia and infarction lead to changes in
innervation, but also in receptor density and response, which we will
discuss in the next section.

 EFFECT OF CATECHOLAMINES
=========================

The expected physiologic response to increased demands, through physical
or psychological arousal, is an augmented cardiac output upwards of 10
L/min mediated through local neurotransmitters. Myocardial contractility
is increased through the effect of NE on heavily
sympathetically-innervated myocardium, which leads to ventricular
inotropy and lusitropy through increased cytosolic calcium.^40^ The
effect of NE at the SA and AV node leads to increases in chronotropy
(heart rate) and dromotropy (speed of conduction).^41,42^ However, at
supraphysiologic levels, pathology develops.

Takotsubo cardiomyopathy, the "broken heart" syndrome, is a clinical
entity well-known for the role of SNS overactivity, characterized by
apical hypokinesis. Situations that cause sympathetic hyperactivation,
from elevated intracranial pressure, pheochromocytoma crises, and
emotionally devastating events, cause both increased systemic and
cardiac sympathetic outflow can lead to a stress cardiomyopathy.^43,44^
But is it systemic NE or local NE that leads to these findings? There
are two paths the sympathetic branch takes to reach the apex of the
heart -- through the coronary artery system and direct innervation of
the myocardium. Understanding the location and density of adrenergic
receptors helps to theorize how catecholamine-excess states leads to
cardiac pathology. Above, we discussed the receptor locations within the
coronary arteries, and here we will discuss the importance of receptor
location in the myocardium.

Almost all cardiomyocytes are in contact with sympathetic neurons, as
sympathetic stimulation leads to normal cardiomyocyte growth.^42,45,46^
B1AR and B2AR are both present in cardiac myocytes at sympathetic nerve
terminals. B1AR accumulate at synapses, while B2AR undergo endocytosis
after stimulation.^47^ These signals help regulate the contractility of
myocytes. The density of adrenergic receptors and NE is greatest at the
base of the heart, with decreasing concentrations moving towards the
apex.^7,8^ Cardiac myocyte toxicity occurs under excessive or prolonged
catecholamine exposure, and is seen in Takotsubo syndrome with
contraction band necrosis on histology. The preference for the apex
could occur through either the coronary adrenergic system, or through
the cardiomyoctes themselves. An older theory posited that multivessel
coronary vasospasm could lead to apical toxicity, however A1AR and B1AR
within the coronary vessels do not cause cardiomyocyte necrosis, which
is seen in Takotsubo syndrome with contraction band necrosis.^48,49^ The
apex may be more vulnerable to NE overactivation due to the scarcity of
available adrenergic receptors, leading to relatively "earlier"
saturation of receptors compared to more proximal parts of the heart.

The adrenergic and vagal neurotransmitters interact locally, with each
branch of the ANS modulating the other. Choline acetyltransferase (ChAT)
somata produce acetylcholine (ACh), which are typically vagal and
cardioinhibitory. Cholinergic cells predominate the cardiac nerves,
making anywhere from 60% to 100% of cardiac ganglia. ChAT somata are
also more common in the atria than the rest of the heart. In the
presence of NE, the inhibitory effects of ACh are exaggerated in a
phenomenon called accentuated antagonism.^50,51^ Nitric oxide synthase
(NOS) produces nitric oxide (NO), and colocalizes with ChAT somata. Its
present equally from endocardium to epicardium, but the density favors
the base versus the apex.^52^ As it is also a co-transmitter that
modulates the vagal effect of increasing the VF threshold, through
modifying action potential duration (APD). TH is responsible for NE
production, but surprisingly 10-20% of all neurons contain both TH and
ChAT.^53^ Both the left and right coronary plexuses however are mainly
adrenergic.^54^ Alongside NE, neuropeptide Y (NPY) is co-released. At
the level of the synapse, NPY attenuates the effect of vagal tone by
decreasing ACh release.^55^ It also functions as a potent coronary
vasoconstrictor acutely, however may lead to angiogenesis in the
long-term.^56^ NPY, in human studies, leads to mild constriction of
epicardial arteries for all patients. However, in those with
microvascular angina, defined by normal left heart catherization but
abnormal myocardial perfusion, NPY leads to transient myocardial
ischemia.^57^ Galanin is also released alongside NPY, and it acts by
inhibiting cholinergic nerves to reduce ACh release. Galanin receptors
(GalR1) are found on ChAT somata and synapses, and may mediate the
breaking of vagal bradycardia as it is expressed strongly at the
sinoatrial (SA) node.^58^ Galanin is normally only co-expressed in \~5%
of TH somata in the stellate, however after injury, its levels are
increased to almost all neurons within 72 hours.^58^

Understanding both the receptor responses and the neurotransmitters
themselves serve to provide a structure to more complex disease states,
such as cardiomyopathy. The increased sympathetic tone seen in acute
ischemic heart failure models show an improved myocardial contraction,
decreased oxygen consumption, decreases intraventricular desynchrony,
all without elevation of NE.^59^ But, through prolonged exposure to
elevated levels of NE, the neuronal bodies become hypertrophied and
edematous. They become less excitable and eventually lead to vagal
withdrawal.^60^ In all types of dilated cardiomyopathy, the B1AR are
downregulated eventually, such that the cardiac sympathetic afferent
reflexes causes minimal increases in contractility.^61^ Systemically
however, this leads to increased vasoconstriction, leading to the high
systemic vascular resistance or afterload that is seen in the end-stage
heart failure population.^62^

 CONCLUSION
===========

The sympathetic outflow to the heart has important implications both
acutely and chronically. The most drastic effect of SNS pathology is the
triggering of ventricular fibrillation, and understanding the anatomical
considerations leads to an understanding of pathogenesis and treatment
strategies (i.e. epicardial scar ablation, stellate ganglion blocks,
etcetera). Understanding the innervation of the coronary arteries and
cardiomyocytes helps to explain the effect of local neurotransmitters
both in the acute setting of ischemia or infarction and also the
pathogenesis of cardiomyopathies. This review serves to contextualize
the sympathetic nervous system to a clinical audience, allowing a better
and more nuanced understanding of the importance of this branch of the
autonomic nervous system in cardiac pathology.

 REFERENCES
===========

1\. Ardell JL, Armour JA. Neurocardiology: Structure-Based function.
*Compr Physiol*. 2016;6(4):1635-1653. doi:10.1002/cphy.c1500462. Malpas
S. The rhythmicity of sympathetic nerve activity. *Prog Neurobiol*.
1998;56(1):65-96. doi:10.1016/S0301-0082(98)00030-63. Vaseghi M, Zhou W,
Shi J, et al. Sympathetic innervation of the anterior left ventricular
wall by the right and left stellate ganglia. *Hear Rhythm*.
2012;9(8):1303-1309. doi:10.1016/j.hrthm.2012.03.0524. Armour JA, Murphy
DA, Yuan BX, Macdonald S, Hopkins DA. Gross and microscopic anatomy of
the human intrinsic cardiac nervous system. *Anat Rec*.
1997;247(2):289-298.
doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-0185(199702)247:2\<289::AID-AR15\>3.0.CO;2-L5.
Pauza DH, Skripka V, Pauziene N, Stropus R. Morphology, distribution,
and variability of the epicardiac neural ganglionated subplexuses in the
human heart. *Anat Rec*. 2000;259(4):353-382.
doi:10.1002/1097-0185(20000801)259:4\<353::AID-AR10\>3.0.CO;2-R6.
Dolezel S, Gerová M, Gero J, Sládek T, Vasku J. Adrenergic innervation
of the coronary arteries and the myocardium. *Acta Anat (Basel)*.
1978;100(3):306-316.7. Pierpont GL, DeMaster EG, Reynolds S, Pederson J,
Cohn JN. Ventricular myocardial catecholamines in primates. *J Lab Clin
Med*. 1985;106(2):205-210.8. Momose M, Tyndale-Hines L, Bengel FM,
Schwaiger M. How heterogeneous is the cardiac autonomic innervation?
*Basic Res Cardiol*. 2001;96(6):539-546. doi:10.1007/s0039501700049.
Morozumi T, Kusuoka H, Fukuchi K, et al. Myocardial
iodine-123-metaiodobenzylguanidine images and autonomic nerve activity
in normal subjects. *J Nucl Med*. 1997;38(1):49-52.10. Walker JL, Thames
MD, Abboud FM, Mark AL, Kloppenstein HS. Preferential distribution of
inhibitory cardiac receptors in the left ventricle of the dog. *Am J
Physiol*. 1978;235(2):H188-H192. doi:10.1152/ajpheart.1978.235.2.H18811.
Crick SJ, Anderson RH, Ho SY, Sheppard MN. Localisation and quantitation
of autonomic innervation in the porcine heart II: endocardium,
myocardium and epicardium. *J Anat*. 1999;195 ( Pt 3(3):359-373.
doi:10.1046/j.1469-7580.1999.19530359.x12. Armour JA, Huang MH, Pelleg
A, Sylvén C. Responsiveness of in situ canine nodose ganglion afferent
neurones to epicardial mechanical or chemical stimuli. *Cardiovasc Res*.
1994;28(8):1218-1225. doi:10.1093/cvr/28.8.121813. de Silva RA. John
MacWilliam, evolutionary biology and sudden cardiac death. *J Am Coll
Cardiol*. 1989;14(7):1843-1849. doi:10.1016/0735-1097(89)90041-714.
Schwartz PJ, De Ferrari GM, Pugliese L. Cardiac sympathetic denervation
100 years later: Jonnesco would have never believed it. *Int J Cardiol*.
2017;237:25-28. doi:10.1016/j.ijcard.2017.03.02015. Schwartz PJ, Verrier
RL, Lown B. Effect of stellectomy and vagotomy on ventricular
refractoriness in dogs. *Circ Res*. 1977;40(6):536-540.
doi:10.1161/01.RES.40.6.53616. Kolman BS, Verrier RL, Lown B. The effect
of vagus nerve stimulation upon vulnerability of the canine ventricle.
*Circulation*. 1975;52(4):578-585. doi:10.1161/01.CIR.52.4.57817. Lown
B, Verrier RL, Rabinowitz SH. Neural and psychologic mechanisms and the
problem of sudden cardiac death. *Am J Cardiol*. 1977;39(6):890-902.
doi:10.1016/S0002-9149(77)80044-118. Matta RJ, Lawler JE, Lown B.
Ventricular electrical instability in the conscious dog. *Am J Cardiol*.
1976;38(5):594-598. doi:10.1016/S0002-9149(76)80008-219. Rahe RH,
Bennett L, Romo M, Siltanen P, Arthur RJ. Subjects' recent life changes
and coronary heart disease in Finland. *Am J Psychiatry*.
1973;130(11):1222-1226. doi:10.1176/ajp.130.11.122220. Greene WA,
Goldstein S, Moss AJ. Psychosocial Aspects of Sudden Death: A
Preliminary Report. *Arch Intern Med*. 1972;129(5):725-731.
doi:10.1001/archinte.1972.0032005004900521. Kliks BR, Burgess MJ,
Abildskov JA. Influence of sympathetic tone on ventricular fibrillation
threshold during experimental coronary occlusion. *Am J Cardiol*.
1975;36(1):45-49. doi:10.1016/0002-9149(75)90866-822. Yannopoulos D,
Bartos JA, Aufderheide TP, et al. The Evolving Role of the Cardiac
Catheterization Laboratory in the Management of Patients With
Out-of-Hospital Cardiac Arrest Circulation. *Circulation*.
2019;139:530-552. doi:10.1161/CIR.000000000000063023. McMahon NC,
Drinkhill MJ, Hainsworth R. Vascular responses to stimulation of
carotid, aortic and coronary artery baroreceptors with pulsatile and
non-pulsatile pressures in anaesthetized dogs. *Exp Physiol*.
1996;81(6):969-981. doi:10.1113/expphysiol.1996.sp00399724. Drinkhill
MJ, Mcmahon NC, Hainsworth R. Delayed sympathetic efferent responses to
coronary baroreceptor unloading in anaesthetized dogs independent
control of pressures to the aortic root , including the coronary
arteries , the aortic arch and the carotid sinuses .
Electrophysiological recordin. *Physiology*. 1996:261-269.25. Lever JD,
Ahmed M, Irvine G. Neuromuscular and intercellular relationships in the
coronary arterioles. A morphological and quantitative study by light and
electron microscopy. *J Anat*. 1965;99(Pt 4):829-840.26. Murphree SS,
Saffitz JE. Delineation of the distribution of beta-adrenergic receptor
subtypes in canine myocardium. *Circ Res*. 1988;63(1):117-125.27.
Baumgart D, Haude M, Görge G, et al. Augmented alpha-adrenergic
constriction of atherosclerotic human coronary arteries. *Circulation*.
1999;99(16):2090-2097.28. Di Carli MF, Tobes MC, Mangner T, et al.
Effects of Cardiac Sympathetic Innervation on Coronary Blood Flow. *N
Engl J Med*. 2002;336(17):1208-1216. doi:10.1056/nejm19970424336170329.
Abe T, Morgan DA, Gutterman DD. Role of adenosine receptor subtypes in
neural stunning of sympathetic coronary innervation. *Am J Physiol Circ
Physiol*. 1997;272(1):H25-H34. doi:10.1152/ajpheart.1997.272.1.H2530.
Zipes DP. Influence of myocardial ischemia and infarction on autonomic
innervation of heart. *Circulation*. 1990;82(4):1095-1105.
doi:10.1161/01.CIR.82.4.109531. Herre JM, Wetstein L, Lin YL, Mills AS,
Dae M, Thames MD. Effect of transmural versus nontransmural myocardial
infarction on inducibility of ventricular arrhythmias during sympathetic
stimulation in dogs. *J Am Coll Cardiol*. 1988;11(2):414-421.
doi:10.1016/0735-1097(88)90110-632. Inoue H, Skale BT, Zipes DP. Effects
of ischemia on cardiac afferent sympathetic and vagal reflexes in dog.
*Am J Physiol Circ Physiol*. 1988;255(1):H26-H35.
doi:10.1152/ajpheart.1988.255.1.H2633. Barber MJ, Mueller TM, Davies BG,
Gill RM, Zipes DP. Interruption of sympathetic and vagal-mediated
afferent responses by transmural myocardial infarction. *Circulation*.
1985;72(3):623-631.34. Minisi AJ, Thames MD. Activation of cardiac
sympathetic afferents during coronary occlusion. Evidence for reflex
activation of sympathetic nervous system during transmural myocardial
ischemia in the dog. *Circulation*. 1991;84(1):357-367.
doi:10.1161/01.CIR.84.1.35735. Hardwick JC, Ryan SE, Beaumont E, Ardell
JL, Southerland EM. Dynamic remodeling of the guinea pig intrinsic
cardiac plexus induced by chronic myocardial infarction. *Auton Neurosci
Basic Clin*. 2014;181(1):4-12. doi:10.1016/j.autneu.2013.10.00836. Neely
BH, Hageman GR. Differential cardiac sympathetic activity during acute
myocardial ischemia. *Am J Physiol*. 1990;258(5 Pt 2):H1534-41.
doi:10.1152/ajpheart.1990.258.5.H153437. Huang WA, Boyle NG, Vaseghi M.
Cardiac Innervation and the Autonomic Nervous System in Sudden Cardiac
Death. *Card Electrophysiol Clin*. 2017;9(4):665-679.
doi:10.1016/j.ccep.2017.08.00238. Cao J-M, Chen LS, KenKnight BH, et al.
Nerve Sprouting and Sudden Cardiac Death. *Circ Res*.
2000;86(7):816-821. doi:10.1161/01.RES.86.7.81639. Chen PS, Chen LS, Cao
JM, Sharifi B, Karagueuzian HS, Fishbein MC. Sympathetic nerve
sprouting, electrical remodeling and the mechanisms of sudden cardiac
death. *Cardiovasc Res*. 2001;50(2):409-416.
doi:10.1016/S0008-6363(00)00308-440. Shan J, Kushnir A, Betzenhauser MJ,
et al. Phosphorylation of the ryanodine receptor mediates the cardiac
fight or flight response in mice. *J Clin Invest*.
2010;120(12):4388-4398. doi:10.1172/JCI3272641. Liao Z, Lockhead D,
Larson ED, Proenza C. Phosphorylation and modulation of
hyperpolarization-activated HCN4 channels by protein kinase A in the
mouse sinoatrial node. *J Gen Physiol*. 2010;136(3):247-258.
doi:10.1085/jgp.20101048842. Franzoso M, Zaglia T, Mongillo M. Putting
together the clues of the everlasting neuro-cardiac liaison. *Biochim
Biophys Acta - Mol Cell Res*. 2016;1863(7):1904-1915.
doi:10.1016/j.bbamcr.2016.01.00943. Y-Hassan S, Tornvall P.
Epidemiology, pathogenesis, and management of takotsubo syndrome. *Clin
Auton Res*. 2018;28(1):53-65. doi:10.1007/s10286-017-0465-z44.
Krishnamoorthy V, Burkhard Mackensen G, Gibbons EF, Vavilala MS. Cardiac
dysfunction after neurologic injury what do we know and where are we
going? *Chest*. 2016;149(5):1325-1331.
doi:10.1016/j.chest.2015.12.01445. Hirsch E, Hilfiker-Kleiner D,
Balligand J-L, et al. Interaction of the heart and its close and distant
neighbours: report of the Meeting of the ESC Working Groups Myocardial
Function and Cellular Biology. *Cardiovasc Res*. 2013;99(4):595-599.
doi:10.1093/cvr/cvt17946. Zaglia T, Milan G, Franzoso M, et al. Cardiac
sympathetic neurons provide trophic signal to the heart via
β2-adrenoceptor-dependent regulation of proteolysis. *Cardiovasc Res*.
2013;97(2):240-250. doi:10.1093/cvr/cvs32047. Shcherbakova OG, Hurt CM,
Xiang Y, et al. Organization of β-adrenoceptor signaling compartments by
sympathetic innervation of cardiac myocytes. *J Cell Biol*.
2007;176(4):521-533. doi:10.1083/jcb.20060416748. Y-Hassan S. Acute
cardiac sympathetic disruption in the pathogenesis of the takotsubo
syndrome: A systematic review of the literature to date. *Cardiovasc
Revascularization Med*. 2014;15(1):35-42.
doi:10.1016/j.carrev.2013.09.00849. Nef HM, Möllmann H, Kostin S, et al.
Tako-Tsubo cardiomyopathy: Intraindividual structural analysis in the
acute phase and after functional recovery. *Eur Heart J*.
2007;28(20):2456-2464. doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehl57050. Stramba-Badiale
M, Vanoli E, De Ferrari GM, Cerati D, Foreman RD, Schwartz PJ.
Sympathetic-parasympathetic interaction and accentuated antagonism in
conscious dogs. *Am J Physiol Circ Physiol*. 1991;260(2):H335-H340.
doi:10.1152/ajpheart.1991.260.2.H33551. Levy MN. *Brief Reviews
Sympathetlc-Parasympathetic Interactions in the Heart*.; 1971.52. Brack
KE, Patel VH, Coote JH, Ng GA. Nitric oxide mediates the vagal
protective effect on ventricular fibrillation via effects on action
potential duration restitution in the rabbit heart. *J Physiol*.
2007;583(2):695-704. doi:10.1113/jphysiol.2007.13846153. Pauza DH,
Saburkina I, Rysevaite K, et al. Neuroanatomy of the murine cardiac
conduction system. *Auton Neurosci*. 2013;176(1-2):32-47.
doi:10.1016/j.autneu.2013.01.00654. Pauziene N, Alaburda P,
Rysevaite-Kyguoliene K, et al. Innervation of the rabbit cardiac
ventricles. *J Anat*. 2016;228(1):26-46. doi:10.1111/joa.1240055.
Herring N, Lokale MN, Danson EJ, Heaton DA, Paterson DJ. Neuropeptide Y
reduces acetylcholine release and vagal bradycardia via a Y2
receptor-mediated, protein kinase C-dependent pathway. *J Mol Cell
Cardiol*. 2008;44(3):477-485. doi:10.1016/j.yjmcc.2007.10.00156. Herring
N. Autonomic control of the heart: Going beyond the classical
neurotransmitters. *Exp Physiol*. 2015;100(4):354-358.
doi:10.1113/expphysiol.2014.08018457. Rosano GMC, Tousoulis D, McFadden
E, Clarke J, Davies GJ, Kaski JC. Effects of neuropeptide Y on coronary
artery vasomotion in patients with microvascular angina. *Int J
Cardiol*. 2017;238:123-127. doi:10.1016/j.ijcard.2017.03.02458. Herring
N, Cranley J, Lokale MN, et al. The cardiac sympathetic co-transmitter
galanin reduces acetylcholine release and vagal bradycardia:
Implications for neural control of cardiac excitability. *J Mol Cell
Cardiol*. 2012;52(3):667-676. doi:10.1016/j.yjmcc.2011.11.01659. Liu Y,
Yue WS, Liao SY, et al. Thoracic spinal cord stimulation improves
cardiac contractile function and myocardial oxygen consumption in a
porcine model of ischemic heart failure. *J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol*.
2012;23(5):534-540. doi:10.1111/j.1540-8167.2011.02230.x60. Singh S,
Sayers S, Walter JS, et al. Hypertrophy of neurons within cardiac
ganglia in human, canine, and rat heart failure: the potential role of
nerve growth factor. *J Am Heart Assoc*. 2013;2(4).
doi:10.1161/JAHA.113.00021061. Beau SL, Tolley TK, Saffitz JE.
Heterogeneous transmural distribution of β-adrenergic receptor subtypes
in failing human hearts. *Circulation*. 1993;88(6):2501-2509.
doi:10.1161/01.CIR.88.6.250162. Wang HJ, Rozanski GJ, Zucker IH. Cardiac
sympathetic afferent reflex control of cardiac function in normal and
chronic heart failure states. *J Physiol*. 2017;595(8):2519-2534.
doi:10.1113/JP273764
